.TH PHP-RS 1 "2025" "php.rs 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
php\-rs \- PHP interpreter reimplemented in Rust (PHP 8.6 compatible)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B php\-rs
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fB\-f\fR] \fIfile\fR [\fB\-\-\fR] [\fIargs\fR...]
.br
.B php\-rs
[\fIoptions\fR] \fB\-r\fR \fIcode\fR [\fB\-\-\fR] [\fIargs\fR...]
.br
.B php\-rs
[\fIoptions\fR] \fB\-S\fR \fIaddr\fR:\fIport\fR [\fB\-t\fR \fIdocroot\fR] [\fIrouter\fR]
.br
.B php\-rs
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fB\-a\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B php\-rs
is a ground-up rewrite of the PHP interpreter in Rust, targeting full
compatibility with PHP 8.6. It includes the lexer, parser, compiler,
virtual machine, garbage collector, and standard extensions.
.PP
When called without arguments and stdin is a terminal, it enters
interactive mode (REPL).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-a\fR
Run interactively (REPL). Each line is executed as PHP code.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR \fIpath\fR
Look for \fBphp.ini\fR in the specified directory or use the specified file.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR
Do not use any configuration (INI) file.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR \fIkey\fR[=\fIvalue\fR]
Define an INI entry. Equivalent to a line in \fBphp.ini\fR.
Can be specified multiple times.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR \fIfile\fR
Parse and execute the specified PHP file.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR \fIcode\fR
Execute the given PHP code directly, without \fB<?php\fR tags.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR
Syntax check only (lint mode). Reports parse errors without executing.
.TP
\fB\-S\fR \fIaddr\fR:\fIport\fR
Start the built-in web server, listening on the given address and port.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR \fIdocroot\fR
Specify the document root directory for the built-in web server.
Defaults to the current working directory.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR
Output HTML-syntax-highlighted source code.
.TP
\fB\-w\fR
Output source with comments and whitespace stripped.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR
Display version information and exit.
.TP
\fB\-m\fR
Show the list of compiled-in modules (extensions) and exit.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR
Display PHP configuration information (phpinfo) and exit.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Display the help message and exit.
.SH INI DIRECTIVES
Key directives that affect execution:
.TP
\fBmemory_limit\fR (default: 128M)
Maximum memory the script may consume. Set to \-1 for unlimited.
.TP
\fBmax_execution_time\fR (default: 0 in CLI, 30 in FPM)
Maximum execution time in seconds. 0 means no limit.
.TP
\fBdisable_functions\fR (default: empty)
Comma-separated list of functions to disable for security.
.TP
\fBopen_basedir\fR (default: empty)
Colon-separated list of directories to restrict file access.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
\fB0\fR
Successful execution.
.TP
\fB1\fR
Generic error.
.TP
\fB130\fR
Script interrupted by SIGINT.
.TP
\fB255\fR
Compilation or fatal runtime error.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Execute a PHP file:
.B php\-rs script.php
.TP
Run inline PHP code:
.B php\-rs \-r 'echo "Hello, World!\\n";'
.TP
Lint a file:
.B php\-rs \-l script.php
.TP
Start development server:
.B php\-rs \-S localhost:8080 \-t ./public
.TP
Disable dangerous functions:
.B php\-rs \-d disable_functions=exec,system script.php
.TP
Set memory limit:
.B php\-rs \-d memory_limit=256M script.php
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fBPHP_INI_DIR\fR
Directory to search for php.ini (if \fB\-c\fR is not specified).
.SH FILES
.TP
\fBphp.ini\fR
PHP configuration file, searched in the current directory or
the path specified by \fB\-c\fR.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
php\-rs targets bit-for-bit output compatibility with PHP 8.6 for all
non-deprecated behaviors, including type coercion rules, operator
semantics, and error messages.
.SH AUTHORS
php.rs contributors
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR php (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/php/php-rs/issues
